Thank you for your submission to PeerJ. I am writing to inform you that in my
opinion as the Academic Editor for your article, your manuscript "On the
intrinsic sterility of 3D printing" (#2014:10:2804:0:0:REVIEW) requires some
minor revisions before we could accept it for publication.

The comments supplied by the reviewers on this revision are pasted below. My
comments are as follows:

Editor's comments
=================

All reviewer comments are pertinent. In particular could the authors address
the generality of the approach to 3D printing (FDM or others?) and materials
(PLA? others? ). Also can they comment on how melt temperatures likely
influence the sterility?

If you are willing to undertake these changes, please submit your revised
manuscript (with any rebuttal information*) to the journal within 45 days.

* Resubmission checklist:

When resubmitting, in addition to any revised files (e.g. a clean manuscript
version, figures, tables, which you will add to the "Primary Files" upload
section), please also provide the following two items:

A rebuttal Letter: A single document where you address all the Editor and
reviewers' suggestions or requirements, point-by-point.

A 'Tracked Changes' version of your manuscript: A document that shows the
tracking of the revisions made to the manuscript. You can also choose to
simply highlight or mark in bold the changes if you prefer. Accepted formats
for the rebuttal letter and tracked changes document are: docx (preferred),
doc, or PDF.

As you previously uploaded a single manuscript file for your initial
submission you will need to upload any primary high resolution image and table
files separately if you have not already done so.

Arti Ahluwalia 
Academic Editor for PeerJ

Reviewer Comments

Reviewer 1
==========

Basic reporting

In this manuscript, entitled "On the intrinsic sterility of 3D printing" by
Neches et al., the authors investigate the ability of melt extrusion 3D
printing to, by its high thermal window for extrusion of most thermoplastics,
intrinsically sterilize extruded material. The authors do a good job
describing the goals of the work and show support of their hypothesis that
extruded PLA filament is more sterile than non-extruded filament. Sequencing
of resulting colonies was a great idea.

Nevertheless, the work could be improved in several ways:

1) a simple diagram (perhaps as figure 1a) explaining melt extrusion would
help to indicate where heating and sterilization as observed is happening. The
authors further reference high pressures in the nozzle, but provide no
quantitative measure or characterization.

Response : We have added a brief discussion of pressures. Extruder
forces vary considerably over the course of a print, and the pulsed
nature of a stepper-motor driven setup is likely to drive transient
shocks that exceed the ambient pressure during continuous flow. When
the extruder force slackens during travel operations, or during
retraction operations, the pressure within the nozzle will drop to or
perhaps below atmospheric pressure. The materials themselves also have
complicated hydrodynamics, owing to the fact that they are
non-Newtonian fluids (like corn starch and water, sometimes called
"ooblek," from the Dr. Seuss book). There is also variability among
materials, extruder designs, nozzle designs and so on. So, it is
difficult to give a specific number.

With these caveats, the maximum sustained pressure of our printer
could perhaps suffice to give readers an upper bound for the pressures
that may be involved. Our printer, an Ultimaker Original with a v2
extruder and v2 nozzle, has an empirically measured holding force of
50-60 Newtons. The nozzle diameter is 0.4 mm, with an area of pi *
0.2^2 = 0.13 mm^2. That works out to nearly 397,887 kPa at the nozzle
aperture, or nearly 4000 atmospheres, or 57,000 PSI. Normal printing
conditions would be at lower pressures, but transient pulses or
blockages could result in pressure spikes of this order. In practice,
the pressure is probably much lower than this unless there is a
jam. Making a different set of assumptions about the hydrodynamics,
the pressure could be distributed evenly over the inside of the whole
mozzle. In this case, it should be about 600 kPa, or about triple the
highest autoclave pressure. Typical printing conditions usually avoid
loading the extruder motor this much, but one could achieve nearly
whatever pressure is desired by choosing a print temperature somewhere
along the very narrow range of temperatures within the glass
transition.

2) the window of 10-120 s for FDM is quite large. The authors should indicate
sterilization times as a function of melt extrusion rate, since faster rates
of extrusion may not heat the plastic for sufficient time to lead to full
sterility, according to their model of sterilization through extrusion.

Response : There is variability among different nozzle designs. For our
printer, which has a melt zone of about 10mm and a filament diameter of
2.89mm, the total volume of material in the molten phase is about 65 cubic
millimeters. For a layer height of 0.2mm and a nozzle diameter of 0.4mm, the
printer puts down 0.08 cubic millimeters of material per millimeter of
printing. We generally run our printer at a maximum feed rate of 50 mm/s, or
about 4 cubic millimeters of material per second. Thus, the plastic remains in
the molten phase within the nozzle for about 16 seconds during continuous
printing. However, continuous printing is often interrupted or slowed. Many
print plans require the nozzle to travel across a gap, where no material is
put down. This will cause a delay in extrusion, and lengthen the thermal
contact time of the plastic. Additionally, many print plans have an outer
region, or "shell," that is usually printed at a lower feed rate than the rest
of the print volume. Last of all, print planing software usually sets a
minimum time for each layer to guarantee the plastic cools sufficiently to
support the next layer. For small parts, the printer may run as slow as 3-5
mm/s, which would result in a thermal contact time of 162 to 270 seconds.

To calculate the thermal contact time, use the formula 

h  = layer height
fd = filament diameter
nd = nozzle diameter
m  = melt zone
f  = feed rate in mm/s

mv = m*pi*(fd/2)^2 (melt volume)
dd = h*nd (bead cross-sectional area)
dr = dd*f (deposit flow rate)
T  = mv/dr (thermal contact time)

T = (m*pi*(fd/2)^2) / (h*nd*f)

We have added this consideration to the manuscript.


3) the authors equate consumer-grade FDM PLA plastic with medical grade
polylactic acid. However, the authors do not provide evidence of the ease with
which their commercial PLA can be degraded, and PLA filament manufacturers do
not indicate what their exact formulation (such as MW or other polymeric
additives) or non-polymeric additives (including coloring) are added to the
filaments. The authors should carefully distinguish FDM PLA filament from
medical grade polylactic acid or provide sufficient characterization of said
PLA filament to prove equivalence. In particular, the colorings chosen or
degradation products may lead to cytotoxicity.

Response : We do not equate these materials in terms of their clinical use.
Consumer PLA filament for 3D printers is not appropriate for medical
applications precisely for the reasons stated here; there is no toxicology
data available for additives that may be present. However, we do claim that
consumer and medical grade PLA has broadly equivalent mechanical properties --
specifically, that they melt under the same range of temperatures. We believe
it is reasonable to suppose that consumer-grade and medical-grade PLA filament
would behave similarly (or identically) in terms of how its sterility is
affected by heat and pressure.

4) Figure 3 needs a scale bar. Further, the referenced data of "cell size,
morphology, and confluency" did not appear to be presented anywhere. Further,
the definition of "intermediate UV" and indeed even "UV treated" did not
appear to be quantified. The authors need to provide the light wavelength used
and an estimate or quantitation of the fluence (typically given as mW/cm2) and
time scale utilized for these sterilization procedures to allow replication by
others.

Response : Scale bars have been added. Cell size, morphology and
confluence were observed by microscopy; Figure 3 is a representative
example of same. We believe this is sufficient for an observation that
is qualitative in nature. Our observations support any claim regarding
the frequency of this outcome. Nevertheless, we feel that the
community may find it interesting that it is at least not impossible
to use 3D printed parts in conjunction with cell culture without
evident deleterious or anomalous effects.

Regarding the quantification of UV flux, we regret that we cannot
accurately report this information. We did not measure the duration of
exposure or the distance from the source, other than to report that we
used a laminar flow hood equipped with a UV bulb, and that the
duration of exposure was at least ten minutes. The bulb, which was
recently replaced, is as follows :

   Philips 308643 - TUV15W G15T8 Germicidal Fluorescent Light Bulb

We will add this to the list of equipment used in the manuscript.

5) There are many kinds of "3D printing" as referenced by the overly broad
title, but the authors only investigate FDM. Thus, the title should be
narrowed to fit the manuscript, perhaps as: "On the intrinsic sterility of
melt-extrusion 3D printing".

Response : We have added a section investigating the sterility of parts
produced by two forms of photopolymerization technologies, Objet's proprietary
technology and stereolithography.

Overall this is an interesting and important work and would be suitable for
publication if these concerns can be sufficiently addressed.

Experimental design

see above.

Validity of the findings

see above.

Comments for the author

see above.

Reviewer 2
==========

Basic reporting

the paper is well written and well organized. the methods adopted to perform
the experiments are clear and well described and the results are clearly
discussed.

Experimental design

the experimental designed is well described, i would suggest to perform other
experiments changing the topology of FDM realized scaffold, because the
topology of cylinder scaffold used is simple, it must be realised scaffolds
with more complex topology where the presence of interconnected struts can
alter the sterility of structure.

Response : We agree that the topology of 3D printed parts is likely to be
important, particularly for mediating surface interactions with different cell
lines in cell culture. Nevertheless, our experiments were intended to explore
the relatively narrow question of feasibility. We show that it is, at least
*POSSIBLE* to make sterile parts using 3D printing, and it is at least
possible under *SOME* circumstances to use 3D printed parts in contact with
cell cultures without an obviously negative impact on development. Our
motivation for conducting these experiments and submitting this manuscript was
to inspire further, more focused research of precisely the type you
suggesting.

Validity of the findings

the results are really interesting but i'm not sure if the scaffold topology
is more complex these findings will be valide. More experiments increasing the
3D topology should be performed.

Response : We agree that more detailed exploration of surface interactions
with 3D printed materials is needed. This is a vast question entraining a
combinatoric explosion of cell types, lineages, growth conditions, induced
conditions, surface geometries, surface materials, printing technologies and
printing conditions. We eagerly anticipate studying examples in the
literature.

Comments for the author

the paper is well written and well organized. the methods adopted to perform
the experiments are clear and well described and the results are clearly
discussed.the results are really interesting but i'm not sure if the scaffold
topology is more complex these findings will be valide. More experiments
increasing the 3D topology should be performed.

Reviewer 3 (David Cuartielles)
==============================

Basic reporting

- The submission follows PeerJ's policies
- The article is written in English, it is clear but it has a couple (about 5) 
  misspelling errors that should be corrected

Response : We've found a few and corrected them. Hopefully we got them all.

- The article provides sufficient background
- The structure is fine
- Figures are relevant to the contents
- The text is self-contained and results are VERY relevant to the hypothesis

Experimental design

- In my understanding the research here presented is original
- The research question is clear
- The investigation is the result of the collaboration of several laboratories
- Methods can be replicated by other investigators, though I am missing 
  information about the firmware versions of the machines used in to print the
  different parts
- The ethical committee from one of the participating universities is mentioned 
  regarding the use of animals in the tests

Validity of the findings

- The data includes a series of control experiments, seems to be consistent
  and replicable
- I am not familiar with the field the authors work with (sterile lab-ware)
  or the tests they have used to evaluate how sterile their self-made tools
  are. I cannot evaluate this aspect
- The conclusions are properly stated and linked to the research question. In
  my opinion, the authors are modest about the possibilities this experiments
  are offering

Comments for the author

Please add information about:
- (minor changes) Firmware used in the machines where you printed the parts, 
  specially if there were any alterations from the original ones

Response : We used the standard, unmodified firmware builds
distributed by Ultimaker that current at the time. We have added this
information to the manuscript.

- (minor changes) External ways to assess the machines are working according
  to the information they show in their displays like using an IR temperature
  gun to confirm the temperature on the extruder, etc. It is important to know
  how far you went in making sure the machines were working as expected

Respose (RYN) : When I first assembled my machine, I used an IR
thermometer to verify the reported temperature, and found it to be
correct to within the accuracy of the IR thermometer. I have not
checked the calibration regularly, as it seems to be doing a fine job
of melting plastic. While accurate temperature control is of great
importance for making beautiful prints, I note that from a bacteria's
point of view, 220C is not a marked improvement over 225C.

- (optional) It would be great if you added some more information about your
  future plans in this field. I would love to see a large-size experiment where
  you asked people to create your normalized test (I consider the cylinder is a
  normalized test) and send it for testing alongside a description of the
  machine they are using

Response : We hope to publish a follow a follow-up soon! However, we
think the parameters that are important to explore are more growth
conditions. While the conditions we tried were as broad as we could
easily make them, they are nevertheless selective for particular
groups of organisms. We would also like to find a way to adapt an
autoclave standard test to this system. Most off-the-shelf standards
are sealed ampules containing sporulated cells, and there isn't an
obvious way to push them through a 3D printer.
